pages/popkos-pond/page.md, before:

---
title: Popko's pond
draft: true
keywords:
  - pond
  - shade
  - bog myrtle
  - Myrica gale
  - willow
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: schuilplaats
  scale: garden
---

# Popko's pond

As a child, Popko could always be seen in and around the water—swimming in the public pool, or roaming through the wild wetlands of then-Drenthe. Some places where now there are only square, green meadows surrounded by deep ditches, then—60+ years ago—there were extensive fens and bogs. Popko would lose himself in that marshy wilderness for whole days or afternoons, looking for viper, grass snake, smooth snake, slowworm, salamander. One one his frequent companions on those adventures was his younger brother Hugo.

Hugo suffered child rheumatism on a young age. The doctor prescribed lots of fresh air. In Winschoten—the city where Popko and Hugo grew up—fresh air was scarse. And so it was that their father—my grandfather—bought a parcel of land in a young forest that was emerging from the heather fields around Norg (in the northern Netherlands). Many a weekend and vacation was spent in a newly-erected red brick little house at the edge of what would remain a heatherfield.

Later, in the sixties, as a biology student in Groningen—<i lang="gos">Grûnn</i>, for native speakers like my Popko—he complained to his father (my grandfather) that he could no longer stomache the city. He moved to Norg, into the family vaction home, for the rest of the duration of his studies. By bicycle, the distance between “De Schuilplaats” (as the house in Norg was dubbed) and the university's biology and chemistry departments (in and nearby <i lang="gos">Grûnn</i>) was a bit much. Thus, that spoiled brat of a father of mine got to go to university in a Mini Cooper that his father bought for him. Where's _my_ Mini Cooper, dad? 😉

While he was living in De Schuilplaats, my father met my mother. (Or, as Akash Sharma—one of my research supervisors—would have me say: my male (♂) parent and female (♀) parent started courtship.) Annemarie, my mother, liked Popko's arms—or rather, the fact that he had arms instead of that incline above the elbow that is still popular among ♂ (but not ♀) intellectuals. Having never lost his childhood enthusiasm for aquatic life, Popko used those karate and judo-honed arms to dig a big, deep pond near De Schuilplaats's south-facing brick facade. He moved such an amount of soil that he promised himself to never, ever dig a big pond by hand again. [He _almost_ held true to that; the tale of _all_ of Popko's ponds extents beyond this one story.]

<!-- He _almost_ held true to that. He and my brother dug one more pond by hand, in Wagenborgen, in the garden of rather sizable family home that my grandfather gifted to my then-adult-ish and still just-as-spoiled father. But for all 6 ponds he has in the home we moved in after Wagenborgen, he let a machinist do the digging for him. He still lives there. -->

That was then. Fast forward 40-something years, to 2018—last year—when me and Marilisa were staying in De Schuilplaats. Popko still joins me there occasionally for garden work and even at 70+ he's still somewhat of a beast with landscaping. It's really not hard to imagine him moving cubic meter after cubic meter after cubic meter of sand. But, for over a decade (since 2006), I've been the main caretaker of the greenery around De Schuilplaats, while my uncle Hugo has taken care of renovation and maintenance of the house itself and earning the investments back for us through renting it out to vacation-goers.

Commit message:

Progress and first pictures in “Popko's pond”

pages/popkos-pond/page.md, after:

---
title: Popko's pond
draft: true
keywords:
  - Crataegus monogyna
  - common hawthorn
  - eenstijlige meidoorn
  - oneseed hawthorn
  - pond
  - shade
  - single-seeded hawthorn
  - bog myrtle
  - Myrica gale
  - willow
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: schuilplaats
  scale: garden
---

# Popko's pond

As a child, Popko could always be seen in and around the water—swimming in the public pool, or roaming through the wild wetlands of then-Drenthe. Some places where now there are only square, green meadows surrounded by deep ditches, then—60+ years ago—there were extensive fens and bogs. Popko would lose himself in that marshy wilderness for whole days or afternoons, looking for viper, grass snake, smooth snake, slowworm, salamander. One one his frequent companions on those adventures was his younger brother Hugo.

Hugo suffered child rheumatism on a young age. The doctor prescribed lots of fresh air. In Winschoten—the city where Popko and Hugo grew up—fresh air was scarse. And so it was that their father—my grandfather—bought a parcel of land in a young forest that was emerging from the heather fields around Norg (in the northern Netherlands). Many a weekend and vacation was spent in a newly-erected red brick little house at the edge of what would remain a heatherfield.

Later, in the sixties, as a biology student in Groningen—<i lang="gos">Grûnn</i>, for native speakers like Popko—he complained to his father (my grandfather) that he could no longer stomache the city. He moved to Norg, into the family vaction home, for the rest of the duration of his studies. By bicycle, the distance between “De Schuilplaats” (as the house in Norg was dubbed) and the university's biology and chemistry departments (in and nearby <i lang="gos">Grûnn</i>) was a bit much. Thus, that spoiled brat of a father of mine got to go to university in a Mini Cooper that his father bought for him. Where's _my_ Mini Cooper, dad? 😉

While he was living in De Schuilplaats, my father met my mother. (Or, as Akash Sharma—one of my research supervisors—would have me say: my male (♂) parent and female (♀) parent started courtship.) Annemarie, my mother, liked Popko's arms—or rather, the fact that he had arms instead of that incline above the elbow that is still popular among ♂ (but not ♀) intellectuals. Having never lost his childhood enthusiasm for aquatic life, Popko used those karate and judo-honed arms to dig a big, deep pond near De Schuilplaats's south-facing brick facade. He moved such an amount of soil that he promised himself to never, ever dig a big pond by hand again. [He _almost_ held true to that promise. For his next pond, dug in Wagenborgen (in the garden of the rather sizable family home that my grandfather bought for my then-adult-ish and still just-as-spoiled father), most of the blisters and sweat were my brother's. The six ponds _after_ that deserve an article of their own.]

That was then. Fast forward 40-something years, to 2018—last year—when me and Marilisa were staying in De Schuilplaats. Popko still joins me there occasionally for garden work and even at 70+ he's still somewhat of a beast with landscaping. It's really not hard to imagine him moving cubic meter after cubic meter after cubic meter of sand. But, for over a decade (since 2006), I've been the main caretaker of the greenery around De Schuilplaats, while my uncle Hugo has taken care of the renovation and maintenance of the house itself and earning the investments back for us through renting it out to vacation-goers.

![April 26, 2018. The hawthorn bushes that obscure Marilisa from sight are awaiting their periodic trim back to the proportions of the fence that their stems are supporting. Marilisa is getting ideas in her head already while looking at Popko's pond, satisfied with all the extra light touching the water after the heavy pruning of the <i lang="la">Rhododendron</i> 2 years prior, in 2016. (Soon, the <i lang="la">Rhododendron</i> would go into its first full purple dress since losing ¼ of its foliage.)](Schuilplaats_2018-04-26_Marilisa_is_getting_ideas_in_her_head_already.jpg){.text-width width="4032" height="3024"}

![Only a sliver of pond is revealed behind Marilisa, but that sliver is a 100% more than what was visible in 2016 before she severely cut back the <i lang="la">Rhododendron</i>.](Schuilplaats_2018-04-26_Rhododenderon_next_to_pond_and_goofy_M.jpg){.text-width width="4032" height="3024"}
