pages/back-into-farming/page.md, before:

---
title: Everybody should get back into farming
draft: true
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: pppermaculture
  scale: garden
---


# Everybody should get back into farming

And by “farming” I mean “gardening”.

But, before digging into the distinction between “farming” and “gardening”,
some words about Elon Musk and Yuval Noah Harari—the billionaire and the
historian—who share a worry.  They are deeply concerned about the wave of
robotization and automization that they see is rapidly gaining in amplitude.
Once that wave breaks, they prophesize, a tsunami of AI-driven developments
will wash over society, at a rate of change that outpaces the most extreme
upheaval that we ever experienced (and, already, increasingly, never quite have
gotten the opportunity to get used to).  If this vision of the future comes
true, computers will be innovating at a speed that is impossible to match for
humans, even at our most collaborative best.

The dream of Elon and Yoval has a dark quality to it.  They foresee that
computers will within a tiny timespan be able to take over the jobs of entire
professional classes, reducing the employability of millions of workers to
zero.  These worries about impending human obsolescence are broadly shared;
other well-know champions of this view are American presidential candidate
Andrew Yang, former Greek Minister of Finance Yanis Varoufakis, and atheist
pundit Sam Harris.

Meanwhile, at the head of electric car maker Tesla, Musk continues to whip his
research and development team forward, in the race of achieving level 4 Full
Self-Driving (FSD) before his competitors do.[^AI-OPEN-LETTER]  In the US
alone, autonomous vehicles (AVS) functioning at level 4 can potentially render
more than 4 million drivers jobless.[^AV-JOBS] Level 4 FSD is dubbed the “mind
off” level, at which the human “driver” no longer needs to pay attention to the
road.  If we fall in with Musk's optimism for when Tesla's Autopilot could
achieve level 4 FSD, the displacement of human drivers could start as early as
_“this year”_ (2022).[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]

Musk worries about the jobs he is attempting to obsolete.  Will this lead
to a “useless class of people”, as Yuval calls them?  For AI researchers, it
will be marvellous feat of engineering to produce the first fully autonomous
vehicle; but, for humans, driving is low-skilled labor.  Many drivers will not be
able to just “learn to code”, as the online adage goes (first applied to coal
miners who lost their jobs and later to the journalists who lost theirs).  And
the truck drivers that _will_ be able to make the jump, will be pushed out of
the job market _again_ a few iterations of “narrow AI” later, before
“artificial _general_ intelligence” (AGI) knocks out the last remaining
jobs at the tail end of the normal distributions for intelligence and
creativity.

At least, such are the predictions of the long array of public intellectuals who
have joined Elon and Yuval into warning the public about the existential threat
posed by AGI, and, simultaneously, make a buck (or a hundred thousand) as
prophets of impending doom.  Elon and Yuval both happen to be proponents of
Universal Basic Income (UBI) as an instrument to steer clear of a _Hunger
Games_-style future in which a small elite is catered to by an army of robots
while the rest of the population is suppressed by that same army.  Add a bit of
CRISPR-aided, AI brain-powered genetic engineering and the vision of the future
that is unveiled indeed appears dystopic.

What such bleak visions of the future fail to take into account are the _other_
existential threats that early twenty-first-century civilization is facing,
which can be summed up as: _ecological degradation._

## The threat that already landed

Biodiversity loss is not a hypothetical threat which may happen “anytime soon
now”.  Top soil depletion is not “just around the corner”.  Pollution is not
something that will affect the health of millions of people “_if_ we fail to
act now”.  In the affluent West, we have been blissfully insulated from some
of the catastrophic cascades that have been triggered by about 10&#x202F;000
years of ruthlessly converting the planet's biosphere into a narrow band of
foodstuffs.  (In 2018, humans (≈&nbsp;0.06 Gt) and our livestock
(≈&nbsp;0.1 Gt) now account for approximately 96% of all mammalian biomass
(≈&nbsp;0.167 Gt) on Earth.[^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS])

It is 50 years ago that The Club of Rome published _The Limits to
Growth_.[^LIMITS-TO-GROWTH]  This 1972 book starts with a primer on the
mathematics of exponential growth, necessarily so, given that “the greatest
shortcoming of the human race is our inability to understand the exponential
function.”[^EXPONENTIAL-HANDICAP]  Indeed, even the supposedly brilliant Musk
struggles with this type of arithmetic; after fathering his tenth-or-so child
this year, came out as stating that we should all be worrying about
_underpopulation_, not _overpopulation_.

<div class="twitter-tweet-wrapper"><blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Doing my best to help the underpopulation crisis.<br/><br/>A collapsing birth rate is the biggest danger civilization faces by far.</p>&mdash; Elon Musk (@elonmusk) <a href="https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1545046146548019201?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 7, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async="true" src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> </div>

This is surprising given Musk's stated worries about anthropogenic climate
change.  Could it be that he was fighting a pang of guilt from knowingly
multiplying his ecological footprint by ten into the next generation?  His
own carbon footprint is already far from tiny.  If it hasn't grown along
with his increased wealth since 2018, Barros & Wilk estimate his CO²
just above Larry Page (from google infame) and some places below Bill Gates
Can somebody explain .  (Jeff Bezos, already much higher in that list in 2018,
has since obtained a super yacht, putting)

Not the first time:
https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1529193812949614594?lang=en

And he doubled down:
https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1563020169160851456?lang=en

I agree. Even Elon Musk and will attempt to explain what it
_really_ means when environmentalists (like me) say that infinite economic
growth on a finite planet is not … sustainable.

So you consume a certain amount of goods and services.  You are, as you are
probably well aware, a consumer.  Probably, you consume a bit more than your
parents, and they a bit more than _their_ parents.  This is assuming that you
are a Westerner, where growth in consumption over the past generations has been
_multiplicative_ and not _additive_.  Because that's the difference between
exponential and linear growth:

* _Linear growth_ would be when each successive generation consumes as much as
  the previous generation _plus_ a certain amount.  If your great grandparents
  ate in such a way that 1 hectare was sufficient to serve the nutritional
  needs of them and their family, and your grandparents needed 2 ha. and your
  parents still only 3 ha. and you yourself 4 hectare that, if extrapolated
  to the wider population (as long as that population is not shrinking), would
  be quite an unsustainable growth trend, but completely in the realm of
  linearity.
* Land use, however, has not been growing linearly in recent history.  Nor has
  population size.  Nor has pollution.  Nor has alienation.  Under an
  exponential growth regime, the amount by which growth occurs _scales_ with
  the size of whatever it is that is growing.  So if, for example, the human
  population starts at 1 billion (which it did, in 1800), and grows at the
  superficial unimpressive growth rate of 2% (which it did, for many years,
  until it recently “slowed down” to 1%), then 1801 would only see 1 billion
  x 0.02 people.  In other words, we wouldn't even see the change in population
  size if we continue to round off to billions.  Yet, this 2 % of annual growth
  resulted in a _doubling_ of the population by 1834.  And the next doubling
  took not 34 years, but only 21 years.  _Fifteen_ years was enough for another
  doubling, and

<!-- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wheat_and_chessboard_problem -->
You may or may not have heard the story of the sage who won a game of chess
against a wealthy ruler.  The ruler was amused when he heard the reward that
the sage sought: he wished to get one grain of rice on the first square of the
chess board, two grains of rice on second square, four squares on the third,
etc.  This seemed like a ludicrously small reward … until they started putting
these small piles of rice on the chessboard and found out, at about square 6,
that it already gets tough to fit the 64 rice grains in a single square.  Six
steps later, the ruler must have started becoming nervous: 4096 rice grains!
At the second square of the third row, another six steps later, the grains
placed there would amount to 262144 grains x 0.029 grams ≈ 7.6 kilograms of
rice would have to be put there.  At the end of that same third row, just
to fill that square would require the ruler's servants to retrieve another 487
kg of rice.  Once the half-way square of the chess board was reached, 124
_tonnes_ of rice would have to be gather from around the ruler's realm.

But human population size and pollution don't double every generation, right?
_Right._  Let's see what happens when, from square 24 onwards, the amount of
rice was not doubled up every generation, but grown by a meagre 1 %.  We already saw that qquare 24
would be burried
would have 0.029 grams of rice—the weight of a single rice grain.  Indeed,
square 8 would receive only 0.031 grams of rice rather than the 7.4 from the
famous story.  Halfway the chess board, 0.040 grams would still not be enough
to cause the rules to sweat.  Maybe the sage would start to doubt himself at
square 40; 0.04 grams of rice would not even be enough for his next meal.  The
ruler would be smilingly putting about two grains of rice on the final
square—square 64—although they would be a bit heavier than the required 0.055
grams.

Okay.  So maybe the ruler, emboldened by his cheap defeat, would agree to a
second game and to the request that this time the counting would start with 10
grains of rice.


Recently, there has be a certain segment of online discourse that has been
worries about “population collapse”.  That this is masturbatory contrarianism
is easi

  If your grandparents in
  1975 had a car that required 900&#x202F;kg of steel, 151 kg of plastic, 38 kg of aluminum

  226 kg of aluminum.

Linear growth is

Only [x] percentage of people are employed in food production.

## Return to the ground

The AI doom prophets _may_ be right about the existential threat that AI poses
to the survival of humans (although I highly doubt it). But, one threat which
is entirely imaginary is massive joblessness due to the absorption of most jobs
by AI. The presumption of this threat is that there's something intrinsically
“human” about our economy, as if the interrelationships between humans and
between humans and their environment have forever been mediated by capitalism.
Capitalism, in its modern meaning, has only become widespread with the
industrial revolution.  It is then that a distinct capitalist class emerged,
consisting of the owners of the means of production become.  The majority part
of the population—those who could only bargain with their labor power—was
reduced to the “proletariat”.

<!-- Almost go back to pre-industrial time -->
<!-- But really compare to pre-agrarian times -->

If you would ask the generally intelligent Tesla Autopilot of the “near future”
to drive you to the Garden of Eden, it would take you to a degraded piece of
arable land, while reading you the remainder of this article…

<!-- TODO: “Fredric Jameson says it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism. Adyashanti says spiritual people are often more afraid of life than they are of death.” ­ https://twitter.com/caitoz/status/1585611754440048640 -->

## It are intellectuals who belong to the

We love narcissistic leaders because of their childish, unlimiting beliefs and lack of grasp of the concept of death.

We shouldn't be eating the rich.  We should be composting them.  Or get them
into farming.  I heard that Bill Gates is already making
forays…[^BILL-GATES-FARMLAND]

## You were always a farmer

[Everybody already _is_ a farmer. They just need to get back into it.]

Your ancestors were farmers.  So you already have a history with farming.

And long before that, they may have not been
total—totalitarian—farmers, but they would have practiced horticulture. That's
why anthropologists have

“hunter-gatherers”, but, likely, it would have been more accurate to describe
them as “hunter-horticulturalists”.  So you a long history—even



## How to get back into farming

## Reanimism

Stoicism: a philosophy that used to be relevant only to kings and emperors.

## Notes

[^AI-OPEN-LETTER]: Elon Musk his running of this arms race at full throttle
  seems at odds with the [open
  letter](https://futureoflife.org/2015/10/27/ai-open-letter/) he signed in
  2015, calling for the prioritization of AI _safety_ research _before_
  advancing the _power_ of AI.  Other signing dignitaries of that letter
  included the Microsoft founder Bill Gates, numerous co-founders of Google's
  DeepMind, and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.  But, the focus of that letter
  is less on the immediate economical impacts of more intelligent machines and
  more on the existential risks posed by AGI (Artificial _General_
  Intelligence), such as when it may decide to start extracting the iron from
  our blood to turn it into paperclips.

[^AV-JOBS]: https://www.law.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs2351/f/downloads/Stick-Shift-Autonomous-Vehicles-Driving-Jobs-and-the-Future-of-Work.pdf
<!-- TODO: clean up endnote -->

[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]: [1h2m38s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=3758s) into the _Lex Fridman Podcast_ [#252](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA), Elon and Lex are talking about how far Tesla was with their Tesla Autopilot at the end of 2021. At the [1:26:44 mark](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=5204s), Lex asks the question: “When do you think Tesla will solve level 4 FSD?” (Level 4 FSD refers to “mind-off” Full Self-Driving, where the driver no longer has to pay attention to the road.) Elon's answer: “It's looking quite likely that it will be next year.”

[^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS]: afddf https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711842115
<!-- TODO -->

[^LIMITS-TO-GROWTH]: _The Limits to Growth_ (1972) can be read online for free at: https://collections.dartmouth.edu/teitexts/meadows/diplomatic/meadows_ltg-diplomatic.html

[^EXPONENTIAL-HANDICAP]: Googling Albert Allen (Al) Bartlett his name with the words “exponential” will give you a wealth of information (including videos) teaching you why you (and all of us, really) should acquaint ourselves more intimately with the mathematics of exponential growth.  Don't let the word “mathematics” scare you.  Exponential mathematics are not complicated; they are just counter-intuitive.

[^POPULATIONMATTERS]: <https://populationmatters.org/>

[^BILL-GATES-FARMLAND]: Bill Gates has been buying …  These investments are a great hedge against economical instability and collapse.

<!-- vim: set spell spelllang=en: -->

Commit message:

Billionaires and their carbon footprint

pages/back-into-farming/page.md, after:

---
title: Everybody should get back into farming
draft: true
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: pppermaculture
  scale: garden
---


# Everybody should get back into farming

And by “farming” I mean “gardening”.

But, before digging into the distinction between “farming” and “gardening”,
some words about Elon Musk and Yuval Noah Harari—the billionaire and the
historian—who share a worry.  They are deeply concerned about the wave of
robotization and automization that they see is rapidly gaining in amplitude.
Once that wave breaks, they prophesize, a tsunami of AI-driven developments
will wash over society, at a rate of change that outpaces the most extreme
upheaval that we ever experienced (and, already, increasingly, never quite have
gotten the opportunity to get used to).  If this vision of the future comes
true, computers will be innovating at a speed that is impossible to match for
humans, even at our most collaborative best.

The dream of Elon and Yoval has a dark quality to it.  They foresee that
computers will within a tiny timespan be able to take over the jobs of entire
professional classes, reducing the employability of millions of workers to
zero.  These worries about impending human obsolescence are broadly shared;
other well-know champions of this view are American presidential candidate
Andrew Yang, former Greek Minister of Finance Yanis Varoufakis, and atheist
pundit Sam Harris.

Meanwhile, at the head of electric car maker Tesla, Musk continues to whip his
research and development team forward, in the race of achieving level 4 Full
Self-Driving (FSD) before his competitors do.[^AI-OPEN-LETTER]  In the US
alone, autonomous vehicles (AVS) functioning at level 4 can potentially render
more than 4 million drivers jobless.[^AV-JOBS] Level 4 FSD is dubbed the “mind
off” level, at which the human “driver” no longer needs to pay attention to the
road.  If we fall in with Musk's optimism for when Tesla's Autopilot could
achieve level 4 FSD, the displacement of human drivers could start as early as
_“this year”_ (2022).[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]

Musk worries about the jobs he is attempting to obsolete.  Will this lead
to a “useless class of people”, as Yuval calls them?  For AI researchers, it
will be marvellous feat of engineering to produce the first fully autonomous
vehicle; but, for humans, driving is low-skilled labor.  Many drivers will not be
able to just “learn to code”, as the online adage goes (first applied to coal
miners who lost their jobs and later to the journalists who lost theirs).  And
the truck drivers that _will_ be able to make the jump, will be pushed out of
the job market _again_ a few iterations of “narrow AI” later, before
“artificial _general_ intelligence” (AGI) knocks out the last remaining
jobs at the tail end of the normal distributions for intelligence and
creativity.

At least, such are the predictions of the long array of public intellectuals who
have joined Elon and Yuval into warning the public about the existential threat
posed by AGI, and, simultaneously, make a buck (or a hundred thousand) as
prophets of impending doom.  Elon and Yuval both happen to be proponents of
Universal Basic Income (UBI) as an instrument to steer clear of a _Hunger
Games_-style future in which a small elite is catered to by an army of robots
while the rest of the population is suppressed by that same army.  Add a bit of
CRISPR-aided, AI brain-powered genetic engineering and the vision of the future
that is unveiled indeed appears dystopic.

What such bleak visions of the future fail to take into account are the _other_
existential threats that early twenty-first-century civilization is facing,
which can be summed up as: _ecological degradation._

## The threat that already landed

Biodiversity loss is not a hypothetical threat which may happen “anytime soon
now”.  Top soil depletion is not “just around the corner”.  Pollution is not
something that will affect the health of millions of people “_if_ we fail to
act now”.  In the affluent West, we have been blissfully insulated from some
of the catastrophic cascades that have been triggered by about 10&#x202F;000
years of ruthlessly converting the planet's biosphere into a narrow band of
foodstuffs.  (In 2018, humans (≈&nbsp;0.06 Gt) and our livestock
(≈&nbsp;0.1 Gt) accounted for approximately 96% of all mammalian biomass
(≈&nbsp;0.167 Gt) on Earth.[^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS])

It is 50 years ago that The Club of Rome published _The Limits to
Growth_.[^LIMITS-TO-GROWTH]  This 1972 book starts with a primer on the
mathematics of exponential growth, necessarily so, given that “the greatest
shortcoming of the human race is our inability to understand the exponential
function.”[^EXPONENTIAL-HANDICAP]  Indeed, even the supposedly brilliant Musk
struggles with this type of arithmetic; after fathering his tenth-or-so child
this year, he came out as stating that we should all be worrying about
_underpopulation_, not _overpopulation_.

<div class="twitter-tweet-wrapper"><blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Doing my best to help the underpopulation crisis.<br/><br/>A collapsing birth rate is the biggest danger civilization faces by far.</p>&mdash; Elon Musk (@elonmusk) <a href="https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1545046146548019201?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 7, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async="true" src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script> </div>

This is surprising given Musk's stated worries about anthropogenic climate
change.  Could it be that he was fighting a pang of guilt from knowingly
multiplying his ecological footprint by ten into the next generation?  His own
carbon footprint was already far from tiny, when Barros & Wilk estimated his
CO² footprint to be just above that of Larry Page (from Google infame) and some
places below Bill Gates.[^BILLIONAIRE-CO2] (Jeff Bezos was already

| ------------------------------ |
| EU household low |
| US household low |
| Elon Musk |

Maybe a graph would be cooler

If it hasn't grown along
with his increased wealth since 2018, Barros & Wilk estimate his CO²
just above Larry Page (from google infame) and some places below Bill Gates
Can somebody explain .  (Jeff Bezos, already some places above Musk in 2018,
has since acquired his very own super-yacht, to climb further still.)

Not the first time:
https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1529193812949614594?lang=en

And he doubled down:
https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1563020169160851456?lang=en

I agree. Even Elon Musk and will attempt to explain what it
_really_ means when environmentalists (like me) say that infinite economic
growth on a finite planet is not … sustainable.

So you consume a certain amount of goods and services.  You are, as you are
probably well aware, a consumer.  Probably, you consume a bit more than your
parents, and they a bit more than _their_ parents.  This is assuming that you
are a Westerner, where growth in consumption over the past generations has been
_multiplicative_ and not _additive_.  Because that's the difference between
exponential and linear growth:

* _Linear growth_ would be when each successive generation consumes as much as
  the previous generation _plus_ a certain amount.  If your great grandparents
  ate in such a way that 1 hectare was sufficient to serve the nutritional
  needs of them and their family, and your grandparents needed 2 ha. and your
  parents still only 3 ha. and you yourself 4 hectare that, if extrapolated
  to the wider population (as long as that population is not shrinking), would
  be quite an unsustainable growth trend, but completely in the realm of
  linearity.
* Land use, however, has not been growing linearly in recent history.  Nor has
  population size.  Nor has pollution.  Nor has alienation.  Under an
  exponential growth regime, the amount by which growth occurs _scales_ with
  the size of whatever it is that is growing.  So if, for example, the human
  population starts at 1 billion (which it did, in 1800), and grows at the
  superficial unimpressive growth rate of 2% (which it did, for many years,
  until it recently “slowed down” to 1%), then 1801 would only see 1 billion
  x 0.02 people.  In other words, we wouldn't even see the change in population
  size if we continue to round off to billions.  Yet, this 2 % of annual growth
  resulted in a _doubling_ of the population by 1834.  And the next doubling
  took not 34 years, but only 21 years.  _Fifteen_ years was enough for another
  doubling, and

<!-- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wheat_and_chessboard_problem -->
You may or may not have heard the story of the sage who won a game of chess
against a wealthy ruler.  The ruler was amused when he heard the reward that
the sage sought: he wished to get one grain of rice on the first square of the
chess board, two grains of rice on second square, four squares on the third,
etc.  This seemed like a ludicrously small reward … until they started putting
these small piles of rice on the chessboard and found out, at about square 6,
that it already gets tough to fit the 64 rice grains in a single square.  Six
steps later, the ruler must have started becoming nervous: 4096 rice grains!
At the second square of the third row, another six steps later, the grains
placed there would amount to 262144 grains x 0.029 grams ≈ 7.6 kilograms of
rice would have to be put there.  At the end of that same third row, just
to fill that square would require the ruler's servants to retrieve another 487
kg of rice.  Once the half-way square of the chess board was reached, 124
_tonnes_ of rice would have to be gather from around the ruler's realm.

But human population size and pollution don't double every generation, right?
_Right._  Let's see what happens when, from square 24 onwards, the amount of
rice was not doubled up every generation, but grown by a meagre 1 %.  We already saw that qquare 24
would be burried
would have 0.029 grams of rice—the weight of a single rice grain.  Indeed,
square 8 would receive only 0.031 grams of rice rather than the 7.4 from the
famous story.  Halfway the chess board, 0.040 grams would still not be enough
to cause the rules to sweat.  Maybe the sage would start to doubt himself at
square 40; 0.04 grams of rice would not even be enough for his next meal.  The
ruler would be smilingly putting about two grains of rice on the final
square—square 64—although they would be a bit heavier than the required 0.055
grams.

Okay.  So maybe the ruler, emboldened by his cheap defeat, would agree to a
second game and to the request that this time the counting would start with 10
grains of rice.


Recently, there has be a certain segment of online discourse that has been
worries about “population collapse”.  That this is masturbatory contrarianism
is easi

  If your grandparents in
  1975 had a car that required 900&#x202F;kg of steel, 151 kg of plastic, 38 kg of aluminum

  226 kg of aluminum.

Linear growth is

Only [x] percentage of people are employed in food production.

## Return to the ground

The AI doom prophets _may_ be right about the existential threat that AI poses
to the survival of humans (although I highly doubt it). But, one threat which
is entirely imaginary is massive joblessness due to the absorption of most jobs
by AI. The presumption of this threat is that there's something intrinsically
“human” about our economy, as if the interrelationships between humans and
between humans and their environment have forever been mediated by capitalism.
Capitalism, in its modern meaning, has only become widespread with the
industrial revolution.  It is then that a distinct capitalist class emerged,
consisting of the owners of the means of production become.  The majority part
of the population—those who could only bargain with their labor power—was
reduced to the “proletariat”.

<!-- Almost go back to pre-industrial time -->
<!-- But really compare to pre-agrarian times -->

If you would ask the generally intelligent Tesla Autopilot of the “near future”
to drive you to the Garden of Eden, it would take you to a degraded piece of
arable land, while reading you the remainder of this article…

<!-- TODO: “Fredric Jameson says it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism. Adyashanti says spiritual people are often more afraid of life than they are of death.” ­ https://twitter.com/caitoz/status/1585611754440048640 -->

## It are intellectuals who belong to the

We love narcissistic leaders because of their childish, unlimiting beliefs and lack of grasp of the concept of death.

We shouldn't be eating the rich.  We should be composting them.  Or get them
into farming.  I heard that Bill Gates is already making
forays…[^BILL-GATES-FARMLAND]

## You were always a farmer

[Everybody already _is_ a farmer. They just need to get back into it.]

Your ancestors were farmers.  So you already have a history with farming.

And long before that, they may have not been
total—totalitarian—farmers, but they would have practiced horticulture. That's
why anthropologists have

“hunter-gatherers”, but, likely, it would have been more accurate to describe
them as “hunter-horticulturalists”.  So you a long history—even



## How to get back into farming

## Reanimism

Stoicism: a philosophy that used to be relevant only to kings and emperors.

## Notes

[^AI-OPEN-LETTER]: Elon Musk his running of this arms race at full throttle
  seems at odds with the [open
  letter](https://futureoflife.org/2015/10/27/ai-open-letter/) he signed in
  2015, calling for the prioritization of AI _safety_ research _before_
  advancing the _power_ of AI.  Other signing dignitaries of that letter
  included the Microsoft founder Bill Gates, numerous co-founders of Google's
  DeepMind, and Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.  But, the focus of that letter
  is less on the immediate economical impacts of more intelligent machines and
  more on the existential risks posed by AGI (Artificial _General_
  Intelligence), such as when it may decide to start extracting the iron from
  our blood to turn it into paperclips.

[^AV-JOBS]: https://www.law.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs2351/f/downloads/Stick-Shift-Autonomous-Vehicles-Driving-Jobs-and-the-Future-of-Work.pdf
<!-- TODO: clean up endnote -->

[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]: [1h2m38s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=3758s) into the _Lex Fridman Podcast_ [#252](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA), Elon and Lex are talking about how far Tesla was with their Tesla Autopilot at the end of 2021. At the [1:26:44 mark](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=5204s), Lex asks the question: “When do you think Tesla will solve level 4 FSD?” (Level 4 FSD refers to “mind-off” Full Self-Driving, where the driver no longer has to pay attention to the road.) Elon's answer: “It's looking quite likely that it will be next year.”

[^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS]: afddf https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711842115
<!-- TODO -->

[^BILLIONAIRE-CO2]: In their 2021 paper [_The outsized carbon footprints of the super-rich_](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15487733.2021.1949847),  Beatriz Barrosa and Richard Wilk estimate the carbon footprint of some public billionaires. […]
https://www.zerofy.net/2022/04/04/household-co2-emissions.html EU vs US household emissions

[^LIMITS-TO-GROWTH]: _The Limits to Growth_ (1972) can be read online for free at: https://collections.dartmouth.edu/teitexts/meadows/diplomatic/meadows_ltg-diplomatic.html

[^EXPONENTIAL-HANDICAP]: Googling Albert Allen (Al) Bartlett his name with the words “exponential” will give you a wealth of information (including videos) teaching you why you (and all of us, really) should acquaint ourselves more intimately with the mathematics of exponential growth.  Don't let the word “mathematics” scare you.  Exponential mathematics are not complicated; they are just counter-intuitive.

[^POPULATIONMATTERS]: <https://populationmatters.org/>

[^BILL-GATES-FARMLAND]: Bill Gates has been buying …  These investments are a great hedge against economical instability and collapse.

<!-- vim: set spell spelllang=en: -->
