---
title: Everybody should get back into farming
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: pppermaculture
  scale: garden
---


# Everybody should get back into farming

And by “farming” I mean “gardening”.

But before digging into the distinction between “farming” and “gardening”, some
words about Elon Musk and Yuval Noah Harari. They both worry about the future
of work and serve as figureheads for the popular view that robotization and
automization are about to reduce the employability of entire professional
classes to zero.

Meanwhile, at the head of electric car maker Tesla, Elon continues to whip his
research and development team forward, in the race of achieving level 4 Full
Self-Driving (FSD) before his competitors do.  In the US alone, autonomous
vehicles (AVS) functioning at level 4 can potentially render more than 4
million drivers jobless.[^AV-JOBS] Level 4 FSD is dubbed the “mind off” level,
at which the human “driver” no longer needs to pay attention to the road. If we
go along with Elon's optimism for when Tesla's Autopilot could achieve level 4
FSD, the displacement of human drivers could start as early as _this year_
(2022).[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]

Elon worries about the jobs he is attempting to obsolete. Will this will lead
to a “useless class of people”, as Yuval calls them?  For AI researchers, it
will be marvellous feat of engineering to produce the first fully autonomous
vehicle, but for humans driving is low-skilled labor.  Many drivers will not be
able to just “learn to code”.  And the truck drivers that _will_ be able to
make the jump, will be pushed out of the job market _again_ a few iterations of
“narrow AI” later, before “artificial _general_ intelligence” (AGI) will knock
out the last remaining jobs at the tail end of the normal distributions for
intelligence and creativity.

At least, such are the predictions of the long array of public intellectuals who
have joined Elon and Yuval into warning the public about the existential threat
posed by AGI, and, simultaneously, make a buck (or a hundred thousand) as
prophets of impending doom.  Elon and Yuval both happen to be proponents of
Universal Basic Income (UBI) as an instrument to steer clear of a _Hunger
Games_-style future in which a small elite is catered to by an army of robots
while the rest of the population is suppressed by that same army.  Add a bit of
CRISPR-aided genetic engineering and a dystopic vision of the future indeed
appears to be revealed.

What such visions of the future fail to take into account are the _other_
existential threats that early twenty-first-century civilization is facing,
which can be summed up as: ecological degradation.

Biodiversity loss is not a hypothetical threat which may happen “anytime soon
now”.  Top soil depletion is not “just around the corner”.  Pollution is not
something that will affect the health of millions of people “_if_ we fail to
act now”.  In the affluent West, we have been blissfully insulated from some
of the catastrophic cascades that have been triggered by about 10&#x202F;000
years of ruthlessly converting the planet's biosphere into a narrow band of
foodstuffs, so that in 2018, humans (≈&nbsp;0.06 Gt) and our livestock
(≈&nbsp;0.1 Gt) now count for approximately 96% of all mammalian biomass
(≈&nbsp;0.167 Gt) on Earth. [^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS]

Only [x] percentage of people are employed in food production.

## Return to the ground

The AI doom prophets _may_ be right about the existential threat that AI poses
to the survival of humans (although I highly doubt it). But, one threat which
is entirely imaginary is massive joblessness due to the absorption of most jobs
by AI. The presumption of this threat is

If you would ask the generally intelligent Tesla Autopilot of the “near future”
to drive you to the Garden of Eden, it would take you to a degraded piece of
arable land, while reading you the remainder of this article…

## It are intellectuals who belong to the

## You were always a farmer

[Everybody already _is_ a farmer. They just need to get back into it.]

Your ancestors were farmers.  So you already have a history with farming.

And long before that, they may have not been
total—totalitarian—farmers, but they would have practiced horticulture. That's
why anthropologists have

“hunter-gatherers”, but, likely, it would have been more accurate to describe
them as “hunter-horticulturalists”.  So you a long history—even

## How to get back into farming

## Reanimism

## Notes

[^AV-JOBS]: https://www.law.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs2351/f/downloads/Stick-Shift-Autonomous-Vehicles-Driving-Jobs-and-the-Future-of-Work.pdf
<!-- TODO: clean up endnote -->

[^TESLA-AUTOPILOT]: [1h2m38s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=3758s) into the _Lex Fridman Podcast_ [#252](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA), Elon and Lex are talking about how far Tesla was with their Tesla Autopilot at the end of 2021. At the [1:26:44 mark](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxREm3s1scA&t=5204s), Lex asks the question: “When do you think Tesla will solve level 4 FSD?” (Level 4 FSD refers to “mind-off” Full Self-Driving, where the driver no longer has to pay attention to the road.) Elon's answer: “It's looking quite likely that it will be next year.”

[^MAMMALIAN-BIOMASS]: afddf https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711842115
<!-- TODO -->

<!-- vim: set spell spelllang=en: -->
