pages/how-to-flush-a-stone-wall/page.md, before:

---
title: How to flush a stone wall
keywords:
  - Friemframfrutsel
  - mini home
  - pig sty
  - porqueira
  - stone wall
  - stonewall
  - to flush a wall
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: pppermaculture
  scale: home
---

# How to flush a stone wall

It wasn't that Laurelin was longing back to her student days: the islands of clothes, inhabited by stuffed animals guarding abandoned books. Maybe she did miss the one island guarded by “Friemframfrutsel”, but I digress from the point I wish to make: she doesn't long back to living her life in the pig sty—<i lang="pt">porqueira</i> in Portuguese—that her room used to be. However, I am speaking here of a figurative <i lang="pt">porqueira</i>. She very much intends to move into a literal pig sty soon. Well, soon… Things move slowly around the <i lang="pt">Ponte de Pedra</i> valley. I planted “soon” here in March 2018. It's now November. And Laurelin has yet to move from the bunk bed in our mother's house to her “soon”-to-be cozy <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> mini-home. The next stop after <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> cannot be “sooned” by any stretch of the imagination: the 200&#x00A0;m² water mill, that ⓐ she [disappointingly](/deceit-or-disinterest/) still has to figure out how to get a building permit for that, and that ⓑ she then has to turn from a few ruined walls around a big pile of rubble into something … else. So, by that measure, <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> _will_ be ready soon.

<?project-insert?>

Previously, I've written about one feature of Laurelin's pig sty: the [composting toilet](/laurelin-her-humanure/), where Lau collects her healthy humanure. Upon entering the pig entrance, the composting toilet is positioned in a little alcove at the right end of the sty. Laurelin constructed that outdent from bricks and cement—a “good exercise for the mill &#x1F628; ”, in her words. Everything left of that—including the entire back wall—is made up of stacked stones, glued together by a mix of gravity, clay and some morsels of cement.

![Everything left of Laurelin's [dry toilet in the making](/laurelin-her-humanure/) was proper stacked stone. (Jups, that's the same vantage point as in [<cite>Laurelin's humanure</cite>](/laurelin-her-humanure/).)](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-14_View_of_toilet_along_the_back_wall_with_cruft.jpg){.text-width width="4032" height="2789"}

## Chip the cruft away.

As so often, with an original wall design rooted in poverty, the beautiful stone work was largely hidden behind an ugly, cementy crust, probably as soon as the builders could afford the cement. When Marilisa and I arrived at <i lang="pt">Ponte de Pedra</i> in November 2017, Laurelin had already been chipping away at that crust for some time, and pieces of the original wall had been revealed. With Laurelin busy working on her dry toilet, Marilisa and I could give in to the urge to peal that disgusting crust away.

![The yield of Tuesday, November 14: many morsels of more-or-less crappy cement and clay that had connected and covered the odd-shaped stones until that morning.](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-14_Cementy_cruft_harvest.jpg){.semi-text-width width="3024" height="4032"}

![The next day, Wednesday, Marilisa is still hacking away at the clay and cement. We'd been slowly uncovering the rustic wall going from the left to the right.](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-15_Marilisa_chiseling_at_the_crust.jpg){.semi-text-width width="3024" height="4032"}

## Chisel your shoulders into a wreck, or hack to the rhythm.

I want to briefly touch upon technique: Marilisa, who was around 25 kilogram lighter than I in 2017, was less affected by stiffness and soreness while hammering on her chisel than me. Granted, my tempo was a bit higher, but if you would extrapolate for strength and size, she would have been the faster, stronger chiseler. Am I trying to be modest? No, I'm trying to build a bridge to 7 years previous, in 2010, when Jorrit and I spent a couple of weeks cleaning up and then repointing the stone walls of an old farm house in the Dordogne region in France. Back then, my right shoulder had been really sore from handling the pneumatic hammer days on end. The hand-chisel was a relief compared with the so-typical static stress of a tool that runs on non-manual power. The injury that flamed up in 2010 wasn't a new injury. I'm only getting a grip on my shoulder health now, in 2018. With my current attitude towards shoulder rehab + prehab, I could learn from Marilisa to hack not from a continuous tension—like I am myself some sort of petrol-powered tool—but from a point of relaxation between movements. Next time, I will see what animal rhythm I can step into rather than using myself like a pent-up machine.

![Here I am, soring my shoulders in 2010, while gaining the experience that I needed to build a bridge to the next paragraph.](Maison_de_Michel_2010-09-22_Monkey_Brothers_zijn_de_voegen_aan_het_uitbikken.jpg){.text-width width="555" height="333"}

## Let the wall breathe.

Of course, immediately upon encountering this project, I started telling Laurelin about how amazingly professional our brother Jorrit and I are at cleaning up these old walls and pointing them with proper cement. I went to great lengths to brosplain the techniques we used on a restoration project in France and to defer to Jorrit wherever in doubt. (_Brosplaining_ is not the same as mansplaining. I was merely trying to be helpful and brag at the same time. If you're looking for misogamy, look further. Another one of my sisters will be happy to femsplain to you where to look, you sexist <i>porco pequeno</i>.)

Commit message:

Early AM progress on “How to flush a wall”

pages/how-to-flush-a-stone-wall/page.md, after:

---
title: How to flush a stone wall
keywords:
  - Friemframfrutsel
  - mini home
  - pig sty
  - porqueira
  - stone wall
  - stonewall
  - to flush a wall
taxonomy:
  author: bigsmoke
  project: pppermaculture
  scale: home
---

# How to flush a stone wall

It wasn't that Laurelin was longing back to her student days: the islands of clothes, inhabited by stuffed animals guarding abandoned books. Maybe she did miss the one island guarded by “Friemframfrutsel”, but I digress from the point I wish to make: she doesn't long back to living her life in the pig sty—<i lang="pt">porqueira</i> in Portuguese—that her room used to be. However, I am speaking here of a figurative <i lang="pt">porqueira</i>. She very much intends to move into a literal pig sty soon. Well, soon… Things move slowly around the <i lang="pt">Ponte de Pedra</i> valley. I planted “soon” here in March 2018. It's now November. And Laurelin has yet to move from the bunk bed in our mother's house to her “soon”-to-be cozy <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> mini-home. The next stop after <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> cannot be “sooned” by any stretch of the imagination: the 200&#x00A0;m² water mill, that ⓐ she [disappointingly](/deceit-or-disinterest/) still has to figure out how to get a building permit for that, and that ⓑ she then has to turn from a few ruined walls around a big pile of rubble into something … else. So, by that measure, <i lang="pt" title="“Pig Sty&#x00A0;2.0”">“Porqueira&#x00A0;2.0”</i> _will_ be ready soon.

<?project-insert?>

Previously, I've written about one feature of Laurelin's pig sty: the [composting toilet](/laurelin-her-humanure/), where Lau collects her healthy humanure. Upon entering the pig entrance, the composting toilet is positioned in a little alcove at the right end of the sty. Laurelin constructed that outdent from bricks and cement—a “good exercise for the mill &#x1F628; ”, in her words. Everything left of that—including the entire back wall—is made up of stacked stones, glued together by a mix of gravity, clay and some morsels of cement.

![Everything left of Laurelin's [dry toilet in the making](/laurelin-her-humanure/) was proper stacked stone. (Jups, that's the same vantage point as in [<cite>Laurelin's humanure</cite>](/laurelin-her-humanure/).)](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-14_View_of_toilet_along_the_back_wall_with_cruft.jpg){.text-width width="4032" height="2789"}

## Chip the cruft away.

As so often, with an original wall design rooted in poverty, the beautiful stone work was largely hidden behind an ugly, cementy crust, probably as soon as the builders could afford the cement. When Marilisa and I arrived at <i lang="pt">Ponte de Pedra</i> in November 2017, Laurelin had already been chipping away at that crust for some time, and pieces of the original wall had been revealed. With Laurelin busy working on her dry toilet, Marilisa and I could give in to the urge to peal that disgusting crust away.

![The yield of Tuesday, November 14: many morsels of more-or-less crappy cement and clay that had connected and covered the odd-shaped stones until that morning.](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-14_Cementy_cruft_harvest.jpg){.semi-text-width width="3024" height="4032"}

![The next day, Wednesday, Marilisa is still hacking away at the clay and cement. We'd been slowly uncovering the rustic wall going from the left to the right.](Ponte_de_Pedra_2017-11-15_Marilisa_chiseling_at_the_crust.jpg){.semi-text-width width="3024" height="4032"}

## Chisel your shoulders into a wreck, or hack to the rhythm.

Marilisa—who, in 2017, was around 25 kilogram lighter than me—was less affected by stiffness and soreness while hammering her chisel than me. Granted, my tempo was a bit higher, but if you would extrapolate for strength and size, she would have been the faster, stronger chiseler. This brings me back 7 years, to 2010, when Jorrit and I spent a couple of weeks cleaning up and then repointing the stone walls of an old farm house in the Dordogne region in France. Back then, my right shoulder had been really sore from handling the pneumatic hammer days on end. (The hand-chisel was a relief compared with the so-typical static stress of a tool that runs on non-manual power.) The injury that flamed up in 2010 wasn't a new injury. And, even now, in 2018, it's not an old, long bygone injury, as I'm only just starting to get a grip on my shoulder stability and flexibility. With my currently evolving softer attitude towards shoulder rehab + prehab, I would have myself learn from Marilisa to hack not from a continuous tension—like I am myself some sort of petrol-powered tool—but from a point of relaxation between movements. Next time, I will see what animal rhythm I can step into rather than using myself like some pent-up machine.

![Here I am [at the right], soring my shoulders in 2010, while gaining weeks of experience with prettifying a rustic farm wall.](Maison_de_Michel_2010-09-22_Monkey_Brothers_zijn_de_voegen_aan_het_uitbikken.jpg){.text-width width="555" height="333"}

## Let the wall breathe.

Of course, immediately upon encountering this project, I started telling Laurelin about how amazingly professional our brother Jorrit and I are at cleaning up these old walls and pointing them with proper cement. I went to some length to brosplain the techniques we used when restoring the farm wall of <i lang="fr">La Maison du Michel</i> in France. (Just so you know: _brosplaining_ is not the same as mansplaining. I was merely trying to be helpful and brag at the same time. If you're looking for misogamy, look further. Another one of my sisters will be happy to femsplain to you where to look, you sexist <i>porco pequeno</i>.)

It turned out that, sure, I was a good enough wielder
